===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

Conﬂict-free Replicated Data Types⋆
Marc Shapiro1,5, Nuno Preguiça2,1, Carlos Baquero3, and Marek Zawirski1,4
1 INRIA, Paris, France
2 CITI, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal
3 Universidade do Minho, Portugal
4 UPMC, Paris, France
5 LIP6, Paris, France
Keywords: Eventual Consistency, Replicated Shared Objects, Large-Scale Dis-
tributed Systems
Abstract. Replicating data under Eventual Consistency (EC) allows
any replica to accept updates without remote synchronisation. This en-
sures performance and scalability in large-scale distributed systems (e.g.,
clouds). However, published EC approaches are ad-hoc and error-prone.
Under a formal Strong Eventual Consistency (SEC) model, we study suf-
ﬁcient conditions for convergence. A data type that satisﬁes these con-
ditions is called a Conﬂict-free Replicated Data Type (CRDT). Replicas
of any CRDT are guaranteed to converge in a self-stabilising manner,
despite any number of failures. This paper formalises two popular ap-
proaches (state- and operation-based) and their relevant suﬃcient con-
ditions. We study a number of useful CRDTs, such as sets with clean
semantics, supporting bothadd and remove operations, and consider in
depth the more complex Graph data type. CRDT types can be composed
to develop large-scale distributed applications, and have interesting the-
oretical properties.
1 Introduction
Replicationandconsistencyareessentialfeaturesofanylargedistributedsystem,
such as the WWW, peer-to-peer, or cloud computing platforms. The standard
“strong consistency” approach serialises updates in a global total order [10].
This constitutes a performance and scalability bottleneck. Furthermore, strong
consistency conﬂicts with availability and partition-tolerance [8].
When network delays are large or partitioning is an issue, as in delay-tolerant
networks, disconnected operation, cloud computing, or P2P systems,eventual
consistency promises better availability and performance [17,21]. An update ex-
ecutes at some replica, without synchronisation; later, it is sent to the other
⋆ This research is supported in part by ANR project ConcoRDanT (ANR-10-BLAN
0208). Marek Zawirski is supported in part by his Google Europe Fellowship in
Distributed Computing 2010. Nuno Preguiça is partially supported by CITI (PEst-
OE/EEI/UI0527/2011). Carlos Baquero is partially supported by FCT project Cas-
tor (PTDC/EIA-EIA/104022/2008).

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

2
replicas. All updates eventually take eﬀect at all replicas, asynchronously and
possibly in diﬀerent orders. Concurrent updates may conﬂict; conﬂict arbitration
may require a consensus and a roll-back.6
This weaker consistency is considered acceptable for some classes of applica-
tions. However, conﬂict resolution is hard. The literature oﬀers little guidance on
designing a correct optimistic system. Ad-hoc approaches are brittle and error-
prone; witness for instance the concurrency anomalies of the Amazon Shopping
Cart [3].
We propose a simple, theoretically-sound approach to eventual consistency.
Our system model, Strong Eventual Consistency or SEC, avoids the complex-
ity of conﬂict resolution and of roll-back.Conﬂict-freedomensures safety and
liveness despite any number of failures. It leverages simple mathematical prop-
erties that ensure absence of conﬂict, i.e., monotonicity in a semi-lattice and/or
commutativity. A trivial example is a replicated counter, which (assuming no
overﬂow) converges because its increment and decrement operations commute.
In our conﬂict-free replicated data types(CRDTs), an update does not require
synchronisation, and CRDT replicas provably converge to a correct common
state. CRDTs remain responsive, available and scalable despite high network
latency, faults, or disconnection.
Non-trivial CRDTs are known to exist: for instance, we previously published
Treedoc, a sequence CRDT for co-operative text editing [14]. Our aim here is to
expand our knowledge of the principles and practice of CRDTs. We claim the
following contributions for this paper:
– A solution to the CAP problem, Strong Eventual Consistency (SEC).
– Formal deﬁnitions of Strong Eventual Consistency (SEC) and of CRDTs.
– Two suﬃcient conditions for SEC.
– A strong equivalence between the two conditions.
– We show that SEC is incomparable to sequential consistency.
– Description of basic CRDTs, including integer vectors and counters.
– More advanced CRDTs, including sets and graphs.
We refer the interested reader to a separate technical report [18] for further
detail and for a comprehensive portfolio of CRDT designs.
2 System model
We consider a system of processes interconnected by an asynchronous net-
work. The network can partition and recover. We assume a ﬁnite setΠ =
{p0,...,p n−1}of non-byzantine processes. Processes inΠmay crash silently;
a crashed process may remain crashed forever, or may recover with its memory
intact. A non-crashed process is saidcorrect.
6 Aconﬂictisacombinationofconcurrentupdates,whichmaybeindividuallycorrect,
but that, taken together, would violate some invariant.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

3
D
s2.m(s1)
s3.m(s2)
D
s2.u(b)
S
S
s1.u(a) s1.m(s2)
D
s3
s
1
s2
s
s1
s2
s2
Fig. 1. State-based replication
s1.t(a); s1.u(a')
s2.t(b); 
s2.u(b')
D
s3.u(a')
s1.u(b')
D
s3.u(b')
D
S
S
D
s2.u(a')
s3
s
1
s2
s
b' a'
b' Fig. 2. Operation-based replication
2.1 State-based object
In this section we specify replicated objects in the so-calledstate-based style.
The intuition is illustrated in Figure 1. Executing an update modiﬁes the state
of a single replica. Every replica occasionally sends its local state to some other
replica, which merges the state thus received into its own state. In this way,
every update eventually reaches every replica, either directly or indirectly.
With no loss of generality, we consider a single object with one replica at each
process. An object is a tuple(S,s 0,q,u,m ). The replica at processpi has state
si∈S, called itspayload; the initial state iss0. A client of the object may read
the state of the object viaquery method q and modify it viaupdate method u.
Method m serves tomerge the state from a remote replica. A method (whether
q,u or m) executes at a single replica.
Systems that deliver every update to every replica eventually in a fault-
tolerant manner are well-known in the literature, for instance gossip or anti-
entropy approaches [5,13]. For simplicity, we will assume hereafter a fully con-
nected communication graph, where every arc is a fair-lossy channel. Inﬁnitely
often, the replica atpi sends (if it is correct) its current state topj; replicapj (if
it is correct)merges the received state into its local state by executing method
m.
A method whose precondition is satisﬁed is saidenabled. We assume that an
enabled method executes as soon as it is invoked. Method executions at some
replica are numbered sequentially from1. Thekth method execution at replica
i will be notedf k
i (a), wheref is eitherq,u orm, anda denotes the arguments.
We noteKi(f ) the ordinal of executionf at replicai, i.e.,Ki(f k
j (a)) = k for
i = j, and is undeﬁned otherwise. (Abusing notation somewhat, we may drop
subscripts, superscripts and/or arguments when there is no ambiguity.)
The states of a replica are numbered sequentially incrementing with each
method execution. Thus, replicai has initial states0
i = s0. Before itskth exe-
cution of a method it has statesk−1
i , andsk
i afterwards. We note the transition
sk−1
i •f k
i (a) = sk
i.
We deﬁne state equivalences≡s′if all queries return the same result fors
and s′. A query has no side-eﬀects, i.e.,(s•q)≡s.
Deﬁnition 1 (Causal History (state-based)). We deﬁne the object’s
causal history C = [ c1,...,c n] (where ci goes through a sequence of states
c0
i,...,c k
i,...) as follows. Initially,c0
i = ∅, for alli. If thekth method execution
at i is: (i) a queryq: the causal history does not change, i.e.,ck
i =ck−1
i ; (ii) an

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

4
update (noteduk
i (a)): it is added to the causal history, i.e.,ck
i =ck−1
i ∪{uk
i (a)};
(iii) a mergemk
i (sk′
i′ ), then the local and remote histories are unioned together:
ck
i =ck−1
i ∪ck′
i′ .
We say that an update isdelivered at some replica when it is included in the
causal history at that replica. An updateu happened-beforeu′iﬀu is deliv-
ered when u′executes: u→u′def
= u∈ck−1
j , where u′executes at replica pj
and Kj(u′) = k. Updates areconcurrent if neither happened-before the other:
u‖u′def
= u⁄→u′∧u′⁄→u. Note that the causal history is a formal reasoning
device, which is normally not needed in a concrete implementation.
Given our communication assumptions, we can conclude that, in a state-
based object, every update is eventually delivered to all replicas. However, this is
not suﬃcient to ensure that replicas converge. For instance, if the merge method
m is a no-op, an update executed at some replica has no eﬀect on other replicas,
and they will never converge.
2.2 Strong Eventual Consistency
Informally, eventual consistency means that replicas eventually reach the same
ﬁnalvalueifclientsstopsubmittingupdates.Wecapturethisintuitionasfollows:
Deﬁnition 2 (Eventual Consistency (EC)).
Eventual delivery:An update delivered at some correct replica is eventually
delivered to all correct replicas:∀i,j :f∈ci⇒♦f∈cj.
Convergence: Correct replicas that have delivered the same updates eventually
reach equivalent state:∀i,j : □ci =cj⇒♦□si≡sj.
Termination: All method executions terminate.
Several EC systems will execute an update immediately, only to discover later
that it conﬂicts with another, and to roll back to resolve this conﬂict [20]. This
constitutes a waste of resources, and in general requires a consensus to ensure
that all replicas arbitrate conﬂicts in the same way. To avoid this, we require a
stronger condition:
Deﬁnition 3 (Strong eventual consistency (SEC)).An object is Strongly
Eventually Consistent if it is Eventually Consistent and:
Strong Convergence:Correct replicas that have delivered the same updates
have equivalent state:∀i,j :ci =cj⇒si≡sj.
2.3 State-based Convergent Replicated Data Type (CvRDT)
We now propose a suﬃcient condition for strong convergence in state-based
objects. A join semilattice (or just semilattice hereafter) is a partial order≤
equipped with aleast upper bound(LUB)⊔for all pairs:m = x⊔y is a Least
Upper Bound of{x,y}under≤iﬀ∀m′,x≤m′∧y≤m′⇒x≤m∧y≤m∧m≤
m′. It follows that⊔is: commutative:x⊔y =y⊔x; idempotent:x⊔x =x; and
associative: (x⊔y)⊔z =x⊔(y⊔z).

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

5
Deﬁnition 4 (Monotonic semilattice object). A state-based object,
equipped with partial order≤, noted (S,≤,s 0,q,u,m ), that has the following
properties, is called a monotonic semi-lattice:(i) Set S of payload values forms
a semilattice ordered by≤. (ii) Merging states with remote states′computes
the LUB of the two states, i.e.,s•m(s′) = s⊔s′. (iii) State is monotonically
non-decreasing across updates, i.e.,s≤s•u.
Theorem 1 (Convergent Replicated Data Type (CvRDT)).Assuming
eventual delivery and termination, any state-based object that satisﬁes the mono-
tonic semilattice property is SEC.
Forlackofspace,weomittheproofthatispresentedinacompaniontechnical
report [19]. A CvRDT converges towards the LUB of the most recent updates.
We require thatx≤y∧y≤x⇒x≡y.
2.4 Op-based Commutative Replicated Data Type (CmRDT)
Alternatively to the state-based style, a replicated object may be speciﬁed
in the operation-based (or op-based) style. An op-based object is a tuple
(S,s 0,q,t,u,P ), whereS,s 0 andq have the same meaning as above (respectively
state domain, initial state and query method). An op-based object has no merge
method; instead an update is split into a pair(t,u ), wheret is a side-eﬀect-free
prepare-updatemethod and u is an eﬀect-updatemethod. The prepare-update
executes at the single replica where the operation is invoked (itssource). At
the source, prepare-update methodt is followed immediately by eﬀect-update
method u, i.e.,f k−1
i = t⇒f k
i = u. (If this were not true, there would be no
causality between successive updates.)
The eﬀect-update method executes at all replicas (saiddownstream). The
source replica delivers the eﬀect-update to downstream replicas using a commu-
nication protocol speciﬁed by the delivery relationP, explained below.
We use the same notations for states and causal history as above, except that
now f can refer to any ofq,t or u. Both queries and prepare-update methods
are side-eﬀect-free, i.e.,s•q≡s•t≡s.
Deﬁnition 5 (Causal History (op-based)).An object’scausal historyC =
{c1,...,c n}is deﬁned as follows. Initially,c0
i = ∅, for alli. If thekth method
execution ati is: (i) a queryq or a prepare-updatet, the causal history does not
change, i.e.,ck
i =ck−1
i ; (ii) an eﬀect-updateuk
i (a), thenck
i =ck−1
i ∪{uk
i (a)}.
An update is said delivered at a replica when the update is included in the
replica’s causal history. Update(t,u ) happened-before (t′,u′) iﬀ the former is
delivered when the latter executes:(t,u )→(t′,u′)⇔u∈ck−1
j , wheret′executes
at pj and k =Kj(t′). The deﬁnition of concurrent updates remains as above.
We assume an underlying reliable causally-ordered broadcast communication
protocol, i.e., one that delivers every message to every recipient exactly once
and in an order consistent with happened-before. Such protocols are a standard
feature of distributed systems; they do not require consensus and they deliver

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

6
to all correct processes as long as any network partition eventually recovers (as
we assumed earlier). It follows that two updates that are related by happened-
before execute at all replicas in the same sequential order:(t,u )→(t′,u′)⇒
∀i,K i(u)<K i(u′). However, concurrent updates may be delivered in any order.
Deﬁnition 6 (Commutativity).Updates (t,u ) and (t′,u′) commute, iﬀ for
any reachable replica states where bothu andu′are enabled,u (resp.u′) remains
enabled in states•u′(resp.s•u), ands•u•u′≡s•u′•u.
Clearly, a suﬃcient condition for convergence of an op-based object is that all
its concurrent operations commute. An object satisfying this condition is called
a Commutative Replicated Data Type (CmRDT).
P is a delivery precondition, i.e., eﬀect-update methodu is enabled only if
the precondition is satisﬁed. We interpret this temporally, i.e., delivery ofu at
replicai may delayed, untilP (si,u ) is true. Therefore, for liveness, we now have
the added obligation to prove that delivery is eventually enabled. Therefore
we restrict our scope to preconditions for which causally-ordered broadcast is
suﬃcient to ensureP.
Theorem 2 (Commutative Replicated Data Type (CmRDT)).Assum-
ing causal delivery of updates and method termination, any op-based object that
satisﬁes the commutativity property for all concurrent updates, and whose deliv-
ery precondition is satisﬁed by causal delivery, is SEC.
The proof is presented in [19].
3 Some results
3.1 Fault-tolerance and the CAP theorem
The CAP theorem states that it is impossible to simultaneously ensure strong
consistency (C), availability (A) and tolerate network partition (P) [8]. As, net-
work faults unavoidably occur in a large-scale environment, a real system must
sacriﬁce either consistency or availability. Availability is often the top priority in
practice [3]: does this mean giving up all consistency guarantees?
No: SEC provides a solution. A SEC replica is always available for both reads
and writes, independently of network conditions. Any communicating subset of
replicas of a SEC object eventually converges, even if partitioned from the rest
of the network. SEC is weaker than strong consistency but nonetheless provides
the well-deﬁned guarantee of strong eventual convergence.
SEC provides an extreme form of fault tolerance, as a SEC object tolerates
up ton−1 simultaneous crashes. Remarkably, SEC does not require to solve
consensus.

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

7
3.2 CvRDTs and CmRDTs are equivalent
Operation-based emulation of a state-based object
Theorem 3 (CmRDT emulation).Any SEC state-based object can be emu-
lated by a SEC op-based object of a corresponding interface.
Proof. Given a CvRDT represented by tuple(S,≤,s 0,q,u,m ), we emulate it by
a CmRDT object(S,s 0,q,t,u ′,P ), which we specify hereby.
State and query of CvRDT can be directly stored and processed by emulating
CmRDTusingthesamedeﬁnitions.Aprepare-update t(a)hasthesameinterface
(accepts the same domain of arguments and returns the same domain of value)
as an updateu(a). It records the result of applying updateu(a) on a copy of
current replica states:s′=s•u(a); return value ofu(a) is passed to the client.
Recorded states′is used as an argument of an actual eﬀect-updateu′(s′), which
is delivered to all replicas by the underlying protocol of CmRDT. Precondition
P is unrestricted and enables delivery at any time. Eﬀect-updateu′(s′) merges
received state using original CvRDT method:s•u′(s′)
def
= s•m(s′).
Since merge always commutes, then updatesu′(s′) commute and since the
communication is reliable, we have a CmRDT with strong eventual consistency,
which propagates all updates of emulated CvRDT.
State-based emulation of an operation-based object State-based emu-
lation of an operation-based object essentially formalises the mechanics of an
epidemic reliable causal broadcast.
Theorem 4 (CvRDT emulation).Any SEC op-based object can be emulated
by a SEC state-based object of a corresponding interface.
Proof. Given a CmRDT represented by tuple(S,s 0,q,t,u,P ), we emulate it by
a CvRDT object((S×U×U ),≤, (s0, ∅, ∅),q′,u′,m ), which we specify hereby.
Without loss of generality, we assume that each invocationuk
i is unique across
replicas and setU denotes all possible updates. CvRDT’s state is then deﬁned
as a triple(sm,M,D ), wheresm is a state of emulated CmRDT,M and D are
two add-only sets of, respectively, known and delivered updates. A relation≤is
deﬁned as following:(sm,M,D )≤(s′
m,M′,D′)
def
= M⊆M′∧D⊆D′.
Aquery q′(a)hasthesameinterfaceas q(a);wedeﬁneitasatrivialdelegation
to q(a) on the CmRDT,sm•q(a). An updateu′(a) has the same interface as
prepare-update t(a). It ﬁrst delegates the invocation to prepare-updatet(a) of
the CmRDT that in turn triggers eﬀect-updateu(a), which becomes a locally
known update. Finally,u′(a) uses a recursive functiond to process updates:
d(sm,M,D )
def
=
{
d(sm•u(a),M,D ∪{u(a)}) if∃u(a)∈M\D :P (sm,u (a))
(sm,M,D ) otherwise
Hence, u′(a) is deﬁned as:(sm,M,D )•u′(a)
def
= d(sm•t(a),M∪{u(a)},D ).

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

8
Finally, mergem takes a union of known messages and processes available
updates: (sm,M,D )•m(s′
m,M′,D′)
def
= d(sm,M∪M′,D ).
Since the emulation ensures that messages are delivered exactly once to each
replica’s embedded object, in the appropriate order, and since the CvRDT con-
forms to SEC criteria, the embedded CmRDT instance is also SEC.
Note that the emulating object forms a monotonic semilattice over domain
S×U×U. Calling or delivering an operation adds it to the relevant message
set, and therefore advances the state in the partial order. The merge methodm
is deﬁned to take the union of theM sets and (possibly) updatingD, and is
thus a LUB operation. This construction is similar to Wuu and Bernstein’s log
covered in Section 4.2.
3.3 SEC is incomparable to sequential consistency
A state-based replica executes a sequence of query, update, and merge methods.
In addition to its sequential behaviour, a CRDT speciﬁes concurrent behaviours
that must satisfy the strong convergence property. As we show now, this permits
executions that would be impossible in a sequentially-consistent system.
Consider a Set CRDTS with operations add(e) and remove(e). Immediately
after add(e), the state will satisfye∈S; afterremove(e) the state satisﬁese /∈S.
In a sequential execution, the last update wins, e.g., afterremove(e)→add(e)
the state satisﬁese∈S. Concurrent adds or removes of diﬀerent elements are
independent, e.g., afteradd(e)‖remove(e′) the state satisﬁese∈S∧e′/∈S.
There is a choice of alternative semantics for concurrent updates of the same
element. When concurrently adding and removing the same element, the add
could win, or the remove could win, or the update of the replica with the highest
IP address could win, or the state might be reset to a distinguished state⊥, and
so on. All these alternatives satisfy the strong convergence condition, and any
of them may be reasonable for some application.
Let us consider the add-wins alternative: afteradd(e)‖remove(e) the state
satisﬁese∈S. Now consider the following scenario. Replicap0 executes the se-
quence add(e); remove(e′). Concurrently, replicap1 executes add(e′); remove(e).
Then, replicap3 merges the state fromp0 and p1. According to the concurrent
speciﬁcation, the ﬁnal state atp3 satisﬁese∈S∧e′∈S. Such a state would
never occur in a sequentially-consistent execution, in which eitherremove(e) or
remove(e′) must be last. Thus, there is a SEC object that is not sequentially
consistent.
Nowconsidertheconverse.Intheabsenceofcrashes,asequentially-consistent
object is SEC. Indeed, sequential consistency is deﬁned by a single order of
operations, after which all replicas must terminate with the same state. However,
in the general case, sequential consistency requires consensus, which cannot be
solved in the presence ofn−1 crashes. Therefore, SEC is incomparable with
sequential consistency.

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

9
4 Example CRDTs
We now recall some basic CRDTs that are known in the existing literature,
which we will later compose to build higher-level objects. We will use state- or
op-based speciﬁcations as most convenient. Generally, we ﬁnd the state-based
style more compact and easier to reason about formally, whereas the op-based
style is often convenient for implementation.
4.1 Integer vectors and counters
Consider the state-oriented speciﬁcation of a vector-of-integers object:
(Nn, [0,..., 0],≤n, [0,..., 0], value, inc, maxn). Vectorsv,v′∈Nn are (partially)
ordered byv≤n v′⇔∀j∈[0..n−1],v [i]≤v′[i]. A query invocation value()
returns a copy of the local payload. An updateinc(i) increments the payload
entry at indexi, that is,s•inc(i) = [s′[0],...,s′[n−1]] where s′[j] = s[j] + 1 if
i =j and s′[j] = s[j] otherwise. Merging two vectors takes the per-index maxi-
mum, i.e.,s•maxn(s′) = [max(s[0],s′[0]),..., max(s[n−1],s′[n−1])]. We omit
the proof that it is a CRDT.
If each processpi is restricted to incrementing its own indexinc(i), this is
the well-known vector clock [11].
An increment-only integer counter is very similar; the only diﬀerence being
that query invocation value() of a vector in statev returns|v|
def
= ∑
jv[j]. We
construct an integer counter that can be both incremented and decremented, by
basically associating two increment-only countersI and D, where incrementing
incrementsI and decrementing incrementsD, whereas value() returns|I|−|D|.
The ordering method≤is deﬁned as(I,D )≤(I′,D′)
def
= I≤n I′∧D≤n D′.
4.2 U-Set, map and log
Another simple CRDT construct is an add-only set object (S,⊆
, ∅, value, add(e),∪). The payload is any set; sets are ordered by inclu-
sion. A query value() returns a copy of the local payload. Updateadd(e) adds
elemente to the set, i.e.,s•add(e) = s∪{e}. It is well-known that sets ordered
by⊆form a semi-lattice with∪as the LUB operator. It is clearly monotonic
by the deﬁnition ofadd. Therefore, the add-only set is a CRDT.
Wuu and Bernstein build further CRDTs by combination of these basic com-
ponents [23]. They propose a set with bothadd and remove operations by asso-
ciating two add-only setsA andR; adding an element adds it toA, removing it
adds it toR; queryvalue() returns the set diﬀerenceA\R. (R is often called the
tombstone set. A client is allowed to remove only an element that is currently in
A). Note that they assume that every element is unique and added only once;
we call their construct U-Set [18]. Wuu and Bernstein derive their Dictionary
data type from U-Set in the obvious way.
A Log is a replicated object, whose payload contains a set (initially empty) of
(event,timestamp) pairs. It assumes that each process maintains a vector clock

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

10
in the usual manner [11]. When an eventeoccurs at processi, the process invokes
update add(e); the update method updates the vector clock (say, to statev) and
adds the pair(e,v ) to the set. The timestamp ensures that each entry is unique.
The merge method takes the union of the local and a remote set.
To avoid unbounded growth, Wuu and Bernstein propose a distributed
garbage collection algorithm that discards unneeded entries. In order to tol-
erate n−1 crashes, only an entry that has been delivered to all processes may
be discarded. If vector clock entryvi[j] = k, this implies that process i has
delivered allk ﬁrst events of processpj. Each replica maintains in its payload
a copy of all remote vector clocks; for each remote site, the merge procedure
keeps the largest version. Then, a replica may discard a log entry as soon as
its timestamp is less than all the remote vector clocks. This algorithm does not
require a consensus, but it is live only if no process is crashed. However, this
may be acceptable, since the liveness of garbage collection does not impact the
correctness of the main algorithm.
This algorithm may be adapted to other data types, for instance to discarding
the A and R entries of a removed element in the U-Set.
5 Directed Graph CRDT
Now let us examine how one would design a more complex data type: a Directed
Graph CRDT. Graphs are an important general-purpose data structure. Some
important applications and algorithms work on graphs, e.g., shortest-path or
web page-rank.
5.1 Thought experiment
To motivate our graph design, consider the “thought experiment” of designing
a web search engine. The search engine uses a directed graph representing the
web structure. This graph may be used, among other things, to compute page
rank. Such an application processes large amounts of data and performs many
updates. For eﬃciency and scalability, processing should be asynchronous; for
responsiveness, processing should be incremental, as fast as each page is crawled.
Processing should not require any synchronisation, e.g., transactions. A CRDT
could be ideal.
We start with a Set CRDT containing some initial URLs to be crawled. A
number of crawler processes run in parallel; each one removes some URL from
the set and downloads it. (It might happen that the same page is downloaded
twice but this does not impact correctness.)
When a crawler ﬁnds a new page, it executes the correspondingaddVertex.
For every page, it parses the links that it contains, comparing it with the page’s
previous version, if any, and executes the correspondingaddArc and removeArc
invocations. Finally, the URLs of the linked pages are added to the set to be
crawled. Note thataddArc must work even if the page at the tail of the arc has
not yet been found (it might not even exist), but such an arc is not functional; a

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

11
payload set V, A -- sets of pairs { (element e, unique-tag w), ...}
initial ∅,∅ -- V : vertices; A: arcs
query lookup (vertex v) : boolean b
let b = (∃w : (v, w) ∈ V )
query lookup (arc (v′, v′′)) : boolean b
let b = (lookup(v′) ∧ lookup(v′′) ∧ (∃w : ((v′, v′′), w) ∈ A)
update addVertex (vertex v)
prepare (v) : w
let w = unique() -- unique() returns a unique value
eﬀect(v, w)
V := V ∪ {(v, w)} -- v + unique tag
update removeVertex(vertex v)
prepare (v) : R
pre lookup(v) -- precondition
pre ⁄ ∃v′ : lookup((v, v′)) -- v is not the head of an existing arc
let R = {(v, w)|∃w : (v, w) ∈ V } -- Collect all unique pairs in V containing v
eﬀect(R)
V := V \R
update addArc (vertex v′, vertex v′′)
prepare (v′, v′′) : w
pre lookup(v′) -- head node must exist
let w = unique() -- unique() returns a unique value
eﬀect(v′, v′′, w)
A := A ∪ {((v′, v′′), w)} -- (v′, v′′) + unique tag
update removeArc(vertex v′, vertex v′′)
prepare (v′, v′′) : R
pre lookup((v′, v′′)) -- arc(v′, v′′) exists
let R = {((v′, v′′), w)|∃w : ((v′, v′′), w) ∈ A}
eﬀect(R) -- Collect all unique pairs in A containing arc (v′, v′′)
A := A \R
Fig. 3. Directed Graph Speciﬁcation (op-based)
lookup of the corresponding arc should fail. Similarly if a node has been removed,
all arcs incident to the node disappear. In this way, the behaviour of our CRDT
will be consistent with that of web pages, which are allowed to contain non-
functional URLs. Once the linked page is created, the link become relevant, e.g.,
for navigation and for page-rank computation.
In the web application, the graph is very large; sending the state between
replicas and merging would be very costly. Therefore, we choose an op-based
approach.
5.2 Design alternatives for arc removal
A directed graph is a pair of sets(V,A ), called vertices and arcs respectively,
such thatA⊆V×V. Updates must maintain the invariant that the head and

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====

12
tail vertices of an arc both exist. Therefore, adding an arc toA has the precon-
dition that its two vertices are inV; conversely, a vertex may be removed only
if it supports no arc; these are preconditions to prepare-update. Furthermore,
the system must ensure that concurrentaddArc(v′,v′′)‖removeVertex(v′) do
not violate the invariant. Several alternatives may be considered:(i) Give prece-
dence to removeVertex(v′): all edges to or fromv′are removed as a side eﬀect.
This is easy to implement, by hiding any arc that includes a removed vertex.
(ii) Give precedence to addArc(v′,v′′): if eitherv′or v′′has been removed, it
is restored. This requires recreating nodes that have being explicitly deleted.
(iii) removeVertex(v′) is delayed until all concurrent addArc operations have
executed. This requires synchronisation which violates the goals of asynchrony
and fault tolerance. There is no perfect choice. Hereafter, we choose Option(i)
because it is adequate in our application scenario.
5.3 Graph speciﬁcation
Figure 3 shows our speciﬁcation for a Directed-Graph CRDT. We prove that
this object is indeed a CmRDT in [19].
This CRDT maintains two sets internally, one for the vertices and one for the
arcs. To add a vertexv, the prepare-update method creates a unique identiﬁer,
w, and the eﬀect-update method adds the pair(v,w ) to the set of vertices.
With this approach, each vertex has an unique internal identiﬁer. If the same
vertex is added twice, the two additions will be distinguished by their two unique
identiﬁers. A lookup will mask the duplicates.
To remove vertexv, the prepare-update computes the setR of pairs that
containv, i.e., all copies known in the source replica; the eﬀect-update method
removes this same setR from the set of vertices in all replicas. As operations
are delivered in causal order, when the eﬀect-update method executes in some
replica, for each pair inR, the correspondentaddVertex operations has already
executed. Thus, unlike the state-based solution of Section 4.2, a set need not
keep tombstones.
If the same vertex is removed and added concurrently, theaddVertex wins,
as the new unique identiﬁer is not included in the set computed by the remove’s
prepare-update. This approach is consistent with a sequential execution, as the
a vertex can removed only if it is observed. The same approach is used for arcs.
To remove a vertex, the source replica checks that the vertex is observed,
and also that it is not the head of any existing arc. Conversely, to add an arc, its
head node must exist, but there is no check for existence of the tail. The lookup
method will mask the existence of such an arc. However, if the tail is added
later, then the arc becomes visible. Similarly, concurrent updates may remove a
vertex that is the head of an arc. However, the lookup method will mask such
an arc.

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====

13
6 Comparison with previous work
Eventual consistency has been an active topic of research in highly-available,
large-scale asynchronous systems [17,21]. Contrary to much previous work [3, for
instance], we take a formal approach grounded in the theory of commutativity
and semilattices.
The state-based approach was invented for register-like objects, where the
only update operation is assignment. It is in wide use in ﬁle systems such as
NFS, AFS or Coda, and in key-value stores such as Dynamo [3] and Riak. Op-
based approaches are used when the cost of transferring state is too high, e.g.,
databases, and when operation semantics are important, e.g., cooperative sys-
tems such as Bayou [13] or IceCube [15].
Although the CRDT concept was identiﬁed only recently, related designs
have been published before. Johnson et. al. invented the LWW-Register [9]. They
propose a database of registers that can be created, updated and deleted, using
the last-writer-wins (LWW) rule to arbitrate between concurrent changes. LWW
ensures a total order of operations, at the cost of losing concurrent updates.
Concurrent editing uses the related concept of Operational Transformation
(OT), due to Ellis and Gibbs [7]. To ensure responsiveness, a local operation ex-
ecutes immediately. Operations are not designed to commute; however, a replica
receiving an update transforms it against previously-executed concurrent up-
dates to achieve a similar result. OT algorithms for a decentralised architecture
have been proposed; Oster et al. show that most of them are incorrect [12]. We
believe that designing for commutativity from the start is cleaner and simpler.
The foundations of CvRDTs were introduced by Baquero and Moura [1]. We
extend their work with CmRDTs and with a number of new results. The CRDT
concept was invented by Shapiro and Preguiça on their work on Treedoc, a
Sequence CRDT for concurrent editing [14]. Logoot is another Sequence CRDT
that supports anundo mechanism based on a CRDT Counter [22].
Roh et al. [16] independently developed the related concept of Replicated
Abstract Data Type. They generalise LWW to a partial order of updates, which
they leverage to build several LWW-style classes.
Burckhardt and Leijen propose the Concurrent Revisions programming
model for shared abstract data types, in which a forked revision runs in iso-
lation until it joins again. Join is based on a three-way merge function [2]. They
show that simple sequential merge functions exist for ADTs built upon Abelian
groups. We have also demonstrated the relation between CRDTs and sequential
consistency in a similar, but more loosely-coupled, replication model.
Ducourthial et al. study algebraic structures with speciﬁc properties in order
to solve self-stabilisation problems [6]. They propose the so-called r-operator for
“silent” tasks [4]. Strong convergence can be seen as as a silent task, given a
limited number of disturbing updates. However, there are diﬀerences between
the two approaches. Whereas a self-stabilising system must tolerate arbitrary
memory corruption, a shared mutable object should change state durably only
by executing update operations. Furthermore, whereas CvRDT states constitute
a monotonic semi-lattice, ther-operator requries a total order.

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====

14
7 Conclusion
We presented the concept of a CRDT, a replicated data type for which some sim-
ple mathematical properties guarantee eventual consistency. In the state-based
style, the successive states of an object should form a monotonic semilattice,
with merge computing a least upper bound. In the op-based style, concurrent
operations should commute. Assuming only that the communication subsystem
ensures eventual delivery (in causal order for op-based objects), CRDTs are
guaranteed to converge towards a common, correct state, without requiring any
synchronisation.
We presented some simple CRDT examples, such as sets, and detailed how
to create a directed Graph CRDT, which might be used in a large-scale web
search engine. Our data types have a clean and deterministic semantics in the
presence of concurrent updates.
Eventual consistency is a critical technique in many large-scale distributed
systems, including delay-tolerant networks, sensor networks, peer-to-peer net-
works, collaborative computing, cloud computing, and so on. However, work on
eventual consistency was mostly ad-hoc so far. Although some of our CRDTs
were known before in the literature or in the folklore, this is the ﬁrst work to
engage in a systematic study. We believe this is required if eventual consistency
is to gain a solid theoretical and practical foundation.
Future work is both theoretical and practical. On the theory side, this will
include understanding the class of computations that can be accomplished by
CRDTs, the complexity classes of CRDTs, the classes of invariants that can
be supported by a CRDT, the relations between CRDTs and concepts such as
self-stabilisation and aggregation, and so on. On the practical side, we plan to
implement the data types speciﬁed herein as a library, to use them in practical
applications, and to evaluate their performance analytically and experimentally.
Another direction is to support infrequent, non-critical synchronous operations,
such as committing a state or performing a global reset. We will also look into
stronger global invariants, possibly using probabilistic or heuristic techniques.
References
1. Baquero, C., Moura, F.: Speciﬁcation of convergent abstract data types for au-
tonomous mobile computing. Tech. rep., Departamento de Informática, Universi-
dade do Minho (Oct 1997)
2. Burckhardt, S., Leijen, D.: Semantics of concurrent revisions. Programming Lan-
guages and Systems pp. 116–135 (2011)
3. DeCandia, G., Hastorun, D., Jampani, M., Kakulapati, G., Lakshman, A., Pilchin,
A., Sivasubramanian, S., Vosshall, P., Vogels, W.: Dynamo: Amazon’s highly avail-
able key-value store. In: Symp. on Op. Sys. Principles (SOSP). Operating Systems
Review, vol. 41, pp. 205–220 (Oct 2007)
4. Delaët, S., Ducourthial, B., Tixeuil, S.: Self-stabilization with R-operators revis-
ited. Self-Stabilizing Systems pp. 68–80 (2005)

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====

15
5. Demers, A.J., Greene, D.H., Hauser, C., Irish, W., Larson, J.: Epidemic algo-
rithms for replicated database maintenance. In: Symp. on Principles of Dist. Comp.
(PODC). pp. 1–12 (Aug 1987), also appears Op. Sys. Review 22(1): 8-32 (1988)
6. Ducourthial, B.: R-semi-groups: a generic approach for designing stabilizing silent
tasks. In: Int. Conf. on Stabilization, Safety, and Security of Distributed Systems
(SSS). pp. 281–295 (2007)
7. Ellis, C.A., Gibbs, S.J.: Concurrency control in groupware systems. In: Int. Conf.
on the Mgt. of Data (SIGMOD). pp. 399–407 (1989)
8. Gilbert, S., Lynch, N.: Brewer’s conjecture and the feasibility of consistent, avail-
able, partition-tolerant web services. SIGACT News 33(2), 51–59 (2002)
9. Johnson, P.R., Thomas, R.H.: The maintenance of duplicate databases. Internet
Request for Comments RFC 677, Information Sciences Institute (Jan 1976)
10. Lamport, L.: Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system.
Communications of the ACM 21(7), 558–565 (Jul 1978)
11. Mattern, F.: Virtual time and global states of distributed systems. In: Int. W. on
Parallel and Distributed Algorithms. pp. 215–226 (1989)
12. Oster, G., Urso, P., Molli, P., Imine, A.: Proving correctness of transformation
functions in collaborative editing systems. Rapport de recherche RR-5795, LORIA
– INRIA Lorraine (Dec 2005)
13. Petersen, K., Spreitzer, M.J., Terry, D.B., Theimer, M.M., Demers, A.J.: Flexi-
ble update propagation for weakly consistent replication. In: Symp. on Op. Sys.
Principles (SOSP). pp. 288–301 (Oct 1997)
14. Preguiça, N., Marquès, J.M., Shapiro, M., Leţia, M.: A commutative replicated
data type for cooperative editing. In: Int. Conf. on Distributed Comp. Sys.
(ICDCS). pp. 395–403 (Jun 2009)
15. Preguiça, N., Shapiro, M., Matheson, C.: Semantics-based reconciliation for col-
laborative and mobile environments. In: Int. Conf. on Coop. Info. Sys. (CoopIS).
Lecture Notes in Comp. Sc., vol. 2888, pp. 38–55 (Nov 2003)
16. Roh, H.G., Jeon, M., Kim, J.S., Lee, J.: Replicated abstract data types: Building
blocks for collaborative applications. Journal of Parallel and Dist. Comp. ((To
appear) 2011)
17. Saito, Y., Shapiro, M.: Optimistic replication. ACM Comput. Surv. 37(1), 42–81
(Mar 2005)
18. Shapiro, M., Preguiça, N., Baquero, C., Zawirski, M.: A comprehensive study of
Convergent and Commutative Replicated Data Types. Rapport de recherche 7506,
Institut Nat. de la Recherche en Informatique et Automatique (INRIA), Rocquen-
court, France (Jan 2011)
19. Shapiro, M., Preguiça, N., Baquero, C., Zawirski, M.: Conﬂict-free Replicated Data
Types. Rapport de recherche 7686, Institut Nat. de la Recherche en Informatique
et Automatique (INRIA), Rocquencourt, France (Jul 2011)
20. Terry, D.B., Theimer, M.M., Petersen, K., Demers, A.J., Spreitzer, M.J., Hauser,
C.H.: Managing update conﬂicts in Bayou, a weakly connected replicated storage
system. In: 15th Symp. on Op. Sys. Principles (SOSP). pp. 172–182 (Dec 1995)
21. Vogels, W.: Eventually consistent. ACM Queue 6(6), 14–19 (Oct 2008)
22. Weiss,S.,Urso,P.,Molli,P.:Logoot-undo:Distributedcollaborativeeditingsystem
on P2P networks. IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Dist. Sys. (TPDS) 21, 1162–1174
(2010)
23. Wuu, G.T.J., Bernstein, A.J.: Eﬃcient solutions to the replicated log and dictio-
nary problems. In: Symp. on Principles of Dist. Comp. (PODC). pp. 233–242 (Aug
1984)